[2201.7.0] - Add bal persist diagram to the overview page (#7147)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/learn-the-platform/ballerina-persist/supported-data-stores.md

layout: ballerina-persist-documentation-left-nav-pages-swanlake
title: Supported data stores
description: The sections give details on the Supported Data Stores.
keywords: ballerina, programming language, ballerina packages, persist, data store, in-memory, mysql, mssql, google sheets
permalink: /learn/ballerina-persist/supported-datastores/
active: persist_supported_datastores

> intro: In the realm of `bal persist` feature, selecting the right data store is crucial for ensuring the reliable storage and retrieval of data. Various data stores exist, each with its strengths and weaknesses. The `bal persist` currently supports four data stores. Depending on the data store you selected for your application, configuration and supported types are varied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intro:In the realm of the `bal persist` feature, selecting the right data store is crucial for ensuring reliable data storage and retrieval. Various data stores exist, each with its strengths and weaknesses. The `bal persist` currently supports four data stores. The configurations and supported types will vary depending on the data store you selected for your application.
```

redirect_from:
- /learn/ballerina-persist/supported-datastores/
---

Following are the supported data stores.

* In-memory

> * Relational Databases (MySQL, MSSQL)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Relational databases (MySQL, MSSQL)
```

The In-Memory data store does not require any configuration. 

## Relational Databases(MySQL, MSSQL)

The data store is a relational database management system that stores data in tables. It is useful for storing data in a relational format. It is not the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you need to explicitly specify the data store when initializing `bal persist` in your application as follows.

```shell
$ bal persist init --datastore [mysql/mssql]
```

### Supported Ballerina types

The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the data store and the corresponding SQL types used to store the data in the database.

> |  Ballerina type  |    SQL type     |

Reviewer 2: There is a slight variation in the SQL types used for MSSQL vs MySQL. Should we include those?

Author: What is the variation, we better include them

Reviewer 2: `float` --> `FLOAT`
`boolean` --> `BIT`
`decimal` --> `DECIMAL(38, 30)`
`byte[]` --> `VARBINARY(MAX)`
`time:Civil` --> `DATETIME2`
`time:Utc` --> `DATETIME2`
`enum` --> `VARCHAR` with checks.

Example for enum:
```ballerina
enum Gender {
    MALE,
    FEMALE
}
```

```sql
gender VARCHAR(6) CHECK (gender IN ('MALE', 'FEMALE')) NOT NULL,
```

Author: Fixed in [fe1e7d7](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7147/commits/fe1e7d704578895e682f108bbca67e3f3c007fe4)

The In-Memory data store does not require any configuration. 

## Relational Databases (MySQL, MSSQL)

> The data store is a relational database management system that stores data in tables. It is useful for storing data in a relational format. It is not the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you need to explicitly specify the data store when initializing `bal persist` in your application as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data store is a relational database management system that stores data in tables. It is useful for storing data in a relational format. It is not the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you need to  specify the data store explicitly when initializing `bal persist` in your application as follows.
```

```shell
$ bal persist init --datastore [mysql/mssql]
```

### Supported Ballerina types

> The supported types for the relational data store are different from database to database. The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the data store and the corresponding SQL types used to store the data in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The supported types for the relational data store are different from one database to another. The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the data store and the corresponding SQL types that are used to store the data in the database.
```

> The supported types for the relational data store are different from database type to database type. The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the data store and the corresponding SQL types used to store the data in the database.

Author: ```suggestion
The supported types for the relational data store are different from database to database. The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the data store and the corresponding SQL types used to store the data in the database.
```

|       enum       |      ENUM       |

 

> This feature doesn't support mapping Ballerina types to different SQL types or changing the default length of an SQL type. If you want to map a Ballerina type to a different SQL type or want to change the default length of an SQL type, you can change it in the `script.sql` file generated by the `persist generate` command before executing the script. it may not work for all the types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature doesn't support mapping Ballerina types to different SQL types or changing the default length of an SQL type. If you want to map a Ballerina type to a different SQL type or want to change the default length of an SQL type, you can change it in the `script.sql` file generated by the `persist generate` command before executing the script. It may not work for all the types.
```

|    time:Civil    |    DATETIME     |
|       enum       |      ENUM       |

#### MSSQL

|  Ballerina type  |    SQL type     |
|:----------------:|:---------------:|
|       int        |       INT       |
|      float       |     FLOAT       |
|     decimal      | DECIMAL(38, 30) |
|      string      |  VARCHAR(191)   |
|     boolean      |     BIT         |
|      byte[]      |    VARBINARY(MAX)    |
|        ()        |      NULL       |
|    time:Date     |      DATE       |
|  time:TimeOfDay  |      TIME       |
|     time:Utc     |    DATETIME2    |
|    time:Civil    |    DATETIME2     |
|       enum       |      VARCHAR with checks.      |
 

> This feature doesn't support mapping Ballerina types to different SQL types or changing the default length of an SQL type. If you want to map a Ballerina type to a different SQL type or want to change the default length of an SQL type, you can change it in the `script.sql` file generated by the `persist generate` command before executing the script. It may not work for all the types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature doesn't support mapping Ballerina types to different SQL types or changing the default length of an SQL type. If you want to map a Ballerina type to an SQL type or change the default length of an SQL type, you can change it in the `script.sql` file generated by the `persist generate` command before executing the script. It may not work for all the types.
```

database = ""
```

> Additionally, you can set values for the following advanced configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MySQL data store. Please refer to the [MySQL Connector documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerinax/mysql/latest#Options) for more information on these parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can set values for the following advanced configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MySQL data store. Please refer to the [MySQL Connector documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerinax/mysql/latest#Options) for more information on these parameters.
```
Refer the writing guidelines on how to add hyperlinks.

Author: Fixed in [d8d5667](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7147/commits/d8d5667f5300667aac35aaa9bfb7a0194be20ad4)

#### MSSQL

```toml
[<packageName>.<moduleName>]
host = "localhost"
port = 1433
user = "sa"
password = ""
database = ""
```

> Additionally, you can set values for the following advanced configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MSSQL data store. Please refer to the [MSSQL Connector documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerinax/mssql/latest#Options) for more information on these parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can set values for the following advanced configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MSSQL data store. Please refer to the [MSSQL Connector documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerinax/mssql/latest#Options) for more information on these parameters.
```
Refer the writing guidelines on how to add hyperlinks.

Author: Fixed in [d8d5667](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7147/commits/d8d5667f5300667aac35aaa9bfb7a0194be20ad4)

### How to set up

#### Set up a DB server instance

Select one of the methods below to set up a DB server.

> >**Tip:** Note the connection and authentication details for connecting to the DB server including the hostname, port, username, and password to be used later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Keep the connection and authentication details for connecting to the DB server including the hostname, port, username, and password saved to be used later.
```

> * Install a DB server on your machine locally by downloading and installing DB server for different platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Install a DB server on your machine locally by downloading and installing it based on your development platform.
```

* Use Docker to create a DB server deployment.

> * Use a cloud-based DB solution such as Google’s CloudSQL, Amazon’s RDS, or Microsoft’s Azure database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use a cloud-based DB solution such as Google’s CloudSQL, Amazon’s RDS, or Microsoft’s Azure database.
```
Add these as sequential steps.

Author: These are not sequential steps
